## Pro-Buyer AI Addendum

## Preface

## By Alexandria (Lexi) Lutz, Spencer Rubin, Lisa R. Lifshitz, and Ted Claypoole, in coordination with the ABA PresidentÕs Task Force on the Law and AI

In  todayÕs  ever-evolving  technology  marketplace,  the  integration  of  artificial  intelligence  (ÒAIÓ)  systems  into  business operations  has  become  increasingly  prevalent.  As  businesses  license  or  subscribe  to  AI  systems  from  vendors  at  the enterprise  level  or  at  other  material  levels  of  spend,  it  is  important  for  those  businesses  to  enter  into,  as  much  as practicable and commercially reasonable, pro-buyer contractual terms that adequately protect their access to and use of vendorsÕ AI systems.

## Key Provisions to Include

In the realm of AI, where complexity and uncertainty often accompany technological advancements, clear and protective contractual terms are imperative for businesses procuring AI systems. These contractual terms should deal with the crucial aspects of any AI procurement, such as data ownership, data security, the vendorÕs representations and warranties, the vendorÕs indemnity obligations, bias mitigation, and the vendorÕs liability. For the following reasons, these key concepts should be included in pro-buyer contractual terms for businesses procuring AI systems:

1. Data Ownership Provisions: Clearly defining a businessÕs ownership of data inputted to and outputted from an AI system through these provisions is crucial so that the business has the necessary rights to use, access, and control such inputs and outputs.
2. Data  Security  Provisions: Including  these  provisions  is  essential  to  protect  a  businessÕs  sensitive information (including personally identifiable and personal information) that is processed by an AI system from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, breach, or misuse.
3. VendorÕs Representations and Warranties: Including representations and warranties from the vendor regarding the AI systemÕs functionality, performance, accuracy, noninfringement of third-party rights, compliance with  laws  and  regulations,  and  adherence  to  high  ethical  standards  provides  a  business  with  remedies  for misrepresentation and breach of warranty if the AI system does not perform in the ways in which the vendor has promised (formally or informally) that it will (or, in some cases, in which a business believes that it will).
4. VendorÕs Indemnity Obligations: Requiring a vendor to indemnify a business for certain elements of liability related to its AI system protects that business from bearing the costs and the expenses of such liability, especially given that the business usually has no control over the AI system, other than its own use thereof and the selection of data to input thereto.
5. Bias Mitigation: Ensuring that a vendor has taken the necessary precautions so that the AI system does not produce biased output, which would result in an individual being treated differently because of a protected ground under applicable laws or other disproportionate harm to such individual, is crucial.
6. VendorÕs  Liability: Stipulating  that  a  vendor  should  bear  appropriate  liability  with  respect  to  its  AI system is  beneficial  for  a  business  customer  so  that  it  ultimately  does  not  become  liable  for  its  use  of  the AI system  if  the  underlying  cause  of  liability  originates  with  the  vendor,  its  affiliates,  or  its  subcontractors. As  a result, a vendorÕs liability should be as extensive as the circumstances permit.

## Key Questions to Ask

In addition to including the key provisions discussed above, a business should approach its agreement with a vendor of an AI system with the same scrutiny and diligence applied to any other armÕs-length technology transaction. The burgeoning complexity of AI systems necessitates that businesses take a tailored approach when drafting, editing, or negotiating such agreements. Key questions to guide businesses in taking this approach include the following:

1. Data  Input  and  Protection: What  types  of  data  (confidential  information,  personally  identifiable information, sensitive personal data, commercially critical information, etc.) will be inputted into the AI system, and what additional protections are required?
2. Transparency and Ethics: How does the business ensure that the vendor is as transparent as possible regarding the sources of training data and the use of data inputs and outputs? Are the AI systemÕs algorithms safe, effective, and ethically sound? How does the vendor mitigate the risk of producing biased output?

3. Security Standards: What are the vendorÕs cybersecurity protocols and measures, and how do they align with the businessÕs cybersecurity requirements, especially given that not all businesses have the same security and regulatory requirements?
4. VendorÕs Reputation: What  feedback  regarding  the AI  system  have  other  clients  of  the  vendor  made publicly available, and what is the vendorÕs code of ethics regarding development and usage of AI systems? Is the vendor currently under regulatory investigation or the subject of multiple lawsuits, i.e., for intellectual property infringement, etc.?

Below is a sample template to be used in connection with an existing buyerÕs master services agreement. It is not intended as legal advice. It will require additional customization depending on the fact situation.

## Pro-Buyer AI Addendum

By Spencer Rubin, Alexandria (Lexi) Lutz, Lisa R. Lifshitz, Ted Claypoole, Charlyn Stanberry, N ikki Edmunds, Conner LeBlanc, and Jim Wiley, in coordination with the ABA PresidentÕs Task Force on the Law and AI

Under Master Services Agreement: [\_\_\_] (the Ò

Agreement Ó)

This AI Addendum is hereby added to, and becomes part of, the Agreement as additional terms, and this AI Addendum should be read together with the Agreement as one document. Capitalized terms not defined in this AI Addendum have the meanings given to them in the Agreement.

## 1. Definitions.

- 1.1. Ò AI  Addendum Ó  means  these  additional  terms  between  the  Contractor  and  Company  governing  the ContractorÕs provision of AI Services to Company pursuant to the Agreement.
- 1.2. Ò AI Services Ó means the services to be provided through the AI System pursuant to the Agreement.
- 1.3. Ò AI  System Ó  means  the  ContractorÕs  proprietary  technological  system  that,  autonomously  or  partly autonomously, processes data through the use of a genetic algorithm, a neural network, machine learning, large language  models,  or  other  techniques  in  order  to  generate  content  or  make  decisions,  recommendations,  or predictionsÑincluding  all  computer  software  (and  all  modifications,  updates,  and  upgrades  thereto);  physical hardware; and associated specifications, Documentation, and Training Instructions, as may be further described in an Order or Statement of Work. [Drafting Note: This definition could also reference any third-party systems used by the Contractor.]
- 1.4. Ò Biased  Output Ó means  any  Output  that  adversely  differentiates,  directly  or  indirectly  and  without justification, in relation to an individual on one or more of the prohibited grounds of discrimination under relevant law, or on a combination of such prohibited grounds, but excluding any Output the purpose and effect of which is to prevent disadvantages that are likely to be suffered by, or to eliminate or reduce disadvantages that are suffered by, any group of individuals when those disadvantages would be based on or related to the prohibited grounds.
- 1.5. Ò Company Data Ó means data provided or made available by Company, or any third party on behalf of or at  the  direction  of  Company,  to  the  AI  System  under  or  in  connection  with  the  Agreement,  including  any Confidential Information and Company Personal Data.
- 1.6. Ò Documentation Ó means the technical documentation and instructions to be provided by the Contractor to Company to accompany the AI System and Output, as applicable.
- 1.7. Ò Harm Ó  means  (a)  physical,  emotional,  or  psychological  harm  to  an  individual;  (b)  damage  to  an individualÕs  or  entityÕs  property,  whether  real,  tangible,  or  intangible;  or  (c)  economic  loss  to  an  individual  or entity.
- 1.8. Ò Inputs Ó  means all  information,  data,  materials,  work,  and  other  content  that  are  uploaded,  submitted, posted, transferred, transmitted, or otherwise received by the AI System from a source external to the AI System, including Company Data.
- 1.9. Ò Output Ó  means  all  information,  data,  product,  content,  and  results  generated  by  the  AI  System  and AI Services, including, as applicable, any related Deliverables.
- 1.10. Ò Requirements Ó  means  those  requirements  of  Company  for  the  Deliverables  as  described  in  the applicable Order or Statement of Work.
- 1.11. Ò Training Data Ó  means  the  data  and  datasets  that  the  Contractor,  or  its  licensors,  uses  or  provides  in order to train or develop the AI System.
- 1.12. Ò Training  Instructions Ó  means  any  and  all  documentation,  methodologies,  and  training  materials  or instructions developed or used by the Contractor, or its licensors, for the purpose of training the AI System.

## 2. General.

- 2.1. At all times during the Term, the Contractor shall ensure that the AI System and the AI Services will (a) comply  with  the  Documentation  and  Requirements  (if  any)  and  (b)  deliver  Output  that  complies  with  the Documentation and Requirements (if any).
- 2.2. Prior to its use of the AI System on behalf of Company or provision of the AI Services, the Contractor will carry out testing, in accordance with good industry practice and appropriate to the intended purpose of the AI

System and AI Services, to identify any Training Data, Training Instructions, or Output that may result in Biased Output, an individual being treated differently on the basis of a protected ground under applicable laws, or other Harm to such individual.

## 3. Grant of Rights.

- 3.1. The Contractor grants to Company a worldwide, nonexclusive right to access and use the AI Services during  the  Term.  This  includes  the  right,  if  agreed  to  by  the  parties,  to  use  the  ContractorÕs  application programming interface (Ò API Ó) to integrate the AI Services into CompanyÕs applications, products, and services (each  a  Ò Company Application Ó)  and  to  make  Company Applications  available  to  end  users,  in  each  case  in accordance with the terms and conditions of an API license agreement mutually executed by the parties.
- 3.2. If  the  parties  agree  in  an  Order  or  Statement  of  Work  that  the  Contractor  will  provide AI  Services  to Company with custom Inputs, Training Data, or other algorithms (whether or not trained using Company Data (a Ò Custom Service Ó)),  then  the  Contractor  grants  to  Company  an  exclusive  right  to  access  and  use  the  Custom Service during the Term, and upon the termination or expiration of the Agreement for any reason, the Contractor shall delete the custom Inputs, Training Data, and other algorithms that are part of the Custom Service. Under no circumstances shall the Contractor have the right to use any custom Inputs, Training Data, or other algorithms that are part of a Custom Service within any public-facing AI Services or any private third-party instances of the AI Services.

## 4. Ownership.

- 4.1. Company Data and Ownership of Output. Company and CompanyÕs end users may provide Company Data to the AI Services and receive Output from the AI Services. As between (a) Company and (b) the Contractor or any other of the ContractorÕs users, and to the extent permitted by applicable law, Company (i) retains all right, title, and interest (including, but not limited to, all Intellectual Property Rights) in and to Company Data; and (ii) owns all right, title, and interest (including, but not limited to, all Intellectual Property Rights) in and to Output, including any related Deliverables provided under a Statement of Work. For greater clarity, the Contractor hereby transfers  and  assigns  to  Company  now  and  forever,  free  of  any  encumbrances,  all  right,  title,  and  interest (including, but not limited to, all Intellectual Property Rights), if any, in and to all Output, and the Contractor represents and warrants that it has all necessary rights, licenses, and permissions to make such assignment in favor of Company, and to waive any moral rights or similar rights that it may have in favor of itself, regarding such Output.
- 4.2. Documentation. The  Contractor  grants  Company  a  perpetual,  irrevocable,  royalty-free,  worldwide, nonexclusive license to use the Documentation in connection with any Output.
- 4.3. The  ContractorÕs  Obligations  for  Company  Data. The  Contractor  will  process  and  store  Company Data in accordance with the Agreement and will only use Company Data as necessary to provide Company with the AI Services and comply with applicable law. The Contractor will not use Company Data or Output to develop, train, or otherwise improve the AI Services, the AI System, or other artificial intelligence systems [except solely for the benefit of Company] .

## 5. Data Security.

- 5.1. The  ContractorÕs  Security  Program. The  Contractor  will  maintain  an  adequate  information  security program  (including  the  adoption  and  enforcement  of  internal  policies  and  procedures)  and  technological, organizational,  and  physical  measures  designed  to  (a)  protect  the  AI  Services,  the  AI  System,  each  Custom Service (including the Inputs, Training Data, and other algorithms thereof), and Company Data (collectively, the Ò Sensitive Assets Ó) against accidental or unlawful loss, access, or disclosure; (b) identify reasonably foreseeable risks to the security of the Sensitive Assets, including unauthorized access thereto or use thereof; and (c) minimize security  risks  to  the  Sensitive Assets,  including  through  regular  risk  assessments  and  testing  (collectively,  the Ò Measures Ó).  The  Contractor  shall  maintain  and  upgrade  the  AI  System  and  the  AI  Services  as  often  as reasonably  necessary  for  the  proper  functioning  and  security  of  the  Sensitive  Assets  in  accordance  with  the Measures, industry-best practices, and applicable laws.
- 5.2. The ContractorÕs Security Obligations. As part of the ContractorÕs Measures, the Contractor will: (a) implement and enforce security policies related to electronic, network, and physical monitoring and data storage, transfer,  and  access;  (b)  deploy  production  infrastructure  behind  VPNs  where  possible;  (c)  require  multifactor authentication for employees and contractors; (d) configure network security, firewalls, accounts, and resources for  least-privilege  access;  (e)  maintain  a  logging  and  incident  response  process;  (f)  maintain  corrective  action plans to respond to potential security threats; and (g) conduct periodic audits of the Measures to ensure that the

Measures are aligned to industry-best practices and are compliant with applicable laws.

- 5.3. Data Protection Addendum. Without limiting the ContractorÕs obligations set forth in Sections 5.1 and 5.2,  the  Contractor  shall  comply  with  all  security  requirements  for  Company  Data  that  are  set  forth  in  a  data protection addendum agreed upon by the parties in writing (the Ò DPA Ó), and in the event of any conflict between any  provision  of  this AI Addendum  and  any  provision  of  the  DPA,  the  provision  of  the  DPA  will  control  the subject matter of any such conflict.
6. Privacy. If Company uses the AI Services or the AI System to process personal information within the Company Data,  all  applicable  provisions  of  the  Agreement  and  the  DPA  will  apply  to  the  processing  of  such  personal information.
7. The ContractorÕs Representations and Warranties. The Contractor additionally represents and warrants that:
- 7.1. It  will provide  the  AI  Services  and  AI  System  to  Company  in  accordance  with  any  Documentation provided to Company and any other Requirements mutually agreed to with Company.
- 7.2. It will comply with all applicable laws relating to the development and provision of the AI Services and the AI System, including all applicable data protection laws.
- 7.3. Any AI System used by the Contractor will be fit for purpose; of satisfactory quality; free from defects; and developed by the Contractor with reasonable care and skill, in accordance with industry-best practices, and compliant with any Requirements.
- 7.4. It  has  and  will  continue  to  ensure  that  it  has  obtained  all  necessary  permissions  and  licenses  for  the provision and use of the AI Services (including Custom Services) and AI System, as well as the Training Data and Contractor Training Instructions used to train the AI System and any other non-Company-Data Inputs uploaded or otherwise used with the AI System.
- 7.5. It  has  obtained  and  will  continue  to  ensure  that  it  has  obtained  all  rights,  licenses,  and  permissions required to provide Output from the AI Services and grant the rights (including Intellectual Property Rights) in the Output to Company as required by Section 4.1 above.
- 7.6. It  will  comply with all rules with respect to artificial intelligence that are promulgated by any industry self-governing organization and that are binding upon the AI Services or AI System.
- 7.7. It  will  develop  and  make  available  the  AI  Services  solely  in  accordance  with  the  highest  ethical principles, and neither the AI System nor the AI Services will (a) provide any Biased Output or (b) cause any Harm.
- 7.8. It will ensure that any Inputs, Training Data, and other algorithms used in the AI System or AI Services are materially accurate, complete, and truthful.
- 7.9. Neither the AI System nor CompanyÕs use of the AI Services will infringe the Intellectual Property Rights of any third party.
- 7.10. None of  the AI  System, AI  Services,  or  Output  will  contain  any  viruses,  disabling  code,  malware,  or malicious  software,  and  no  use  by  Company  of  the AI  System, AI  Services,  or  Output  will  cause  any  loss  or damage to CompanyÕs data, systems, hardware, records, programs, or other property.

## 8. Indemnity.

8.1. The Contractor additionally agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Indemnified Parties from and against any Claims arising out of (a) an allegation that any of the AI Services, the AI System, Inputs, Training Data, or Output infringes, misappropriates, or otherwise violates any Intellectual Property Right or other rights of any third  party,  or  (b)  any  breach  by  the  Contractor  or  any  of  its  employees,  agents,  or  subcontractors  of  any applicable law or of Sections 4Ð6 of this Addendum. If the Contractor reasonably believes that all or any portion of  the  AI  Services,  AI  System,  Inputs,  Training  Data,  or  Output  is  likely  to  become  the  subject  of  any infringement  Claim,  the  Contractor  (i)  will  procure,  at  the  ContractorÕs  expense,  the  right  for  Company  to continue using the AI Services, AI System, Inputs, Training Data, or Output in accordance with this Agreement, or (ii)  will  replace or modify the allegedly infringing components of the AI Services, AI System, Inputs, Training Data, or Output with functional equivalents so that the AI Services, AI System, Inputs, Training Data, or Output are noninfringing.

- 8.2. If the Contractor (a) cannot successfully implement the solutions outlined in Sections 8.1(i) and (ii) above within thirty (30) days (or as otherwise agreed with Company) from the date that the Indemnified Parties cease

use  of  the  AI  Services,  AI  System,  or  Output  or  (b)  receives  a  judicial  order  preventing  or  enjoining  the Indemnified Parties from using the AI Services, AI System, or Output as contemplated hereunder, then Company may (i) notify the Contractor in writing that it considers the failure to implement such solutions a default by the Contractor of the Agreement; and (ii) opt to terminate (A) all affected Orders and Statements of Work or (B) the Agreement. In the event of such a termination, the Contractor shall (I) reimburse to Company all fees previously paid  by  Company  with  respect  to  the  infringing  AI  Services,  AI  System,  or  Output  and  (II)  pay  such  other damages as Company may suffer as a consequence of its inability to use the infringing AI Services, AI System, or Output, without prejudice to any other rights and remedies as may be available to any of the Indemnified Parties under this Agreement, or at law or in equity.

9. Liability. To  the  extent  that  Company  uses  the AI  Services  within  the  scope  of  this Agreement,  including  any Documentation  and  Requirements  agreed  to  by  the  parties,  the  Contractor  shall  be  liable  for  any  damages  or losses  arising  from  CompanyÕs reasonable and customary use of the AI Services and the Output, including all related Deliverables provided under any Statements of Work. This includes liability for any damages or losses arising from the AI ServicesÕ or AI SystemÕs performance, even if such issues are due to unpredictable behavior of the AI SystemÕs algorithms.
10. Insurance. During  the  Term,  in  addition  to  the  insurance  described  in  the  Agreement,  the  Contractor acknowledges and agrees that it shall obtain and maintain in force during the Term, at its sole cost and expense, a cyber-liability insurance policy with limits of not less than five million dollars ($5,000,000) per occurrence and ten  million  dollars  ($10,000,000)  in  the  annual  aggregate,  and  such  policy  must  include  Company  and  its Affiliates as additional insureds.
11. Effect of Termination. Upon termination or expiry of the Agreement for any reason, Company shall promptly cease all use of the AI Services and AI System, and the Contractor shall immediately return to Company, or at CompanyÕs  request,  immediately  and  irrevocably  delete  and  destroy  all  copies  of  Company  Data,  Output (including any related Deliverables), and Custom Services in its and its employeesÕ, agentsÕ, and subcontractorsÕ possession and shall certify in writing to Company within fifteen (15) days of such termination or expiration that this has been done.
12. Survival. For avoidance of doubt, Sections 4, 6Ð9, 11, and 12 of this AI Addendum shall survive any termination or expiration of the Agreement.